Hey guys, welcome back to the course.
Ok, so we have a basic understanding of
how the sausage of the internet is made.
Great. But since we're living in a world
dominated by mobile operating systems
and mobile platforms now, I thought
I'd take a second to just deviate
and talk a little bit about the mechanics of the mobile internet.
Again, this stuff is really worth knowing,
because you inevitably will work on
some type of mobile use case, and mobile
use cases are almost always dominated
by a handful of issues stemming from how exactly they work.
The first thing that you need to
understand about mobile internet is that
the easiest way of thinking about it is just think about it
like a computer with a really small screen that sometimes rings.
Your smartphone is the exact same as the client
that we were talking about before to describe your computer.
But how does getting information to your phone differ from
getting information directly to your computer?
Well, dun dun dun...
There's actually just a couple more steps.
Remember how we talked about routers and
how their sole job is to route connections
to a modem and then to an Internet Service Provider?
Well, it essentially works like that, but
instead of a crappy Chinese manufactured box
with blinking lights, it's a 400-foot tall cell tower directly
in the way of your apartment's amazing view.
Cell phones have two ways of getting
the data they need: WiFi and cell service.
WiFi only works within a certain range,
and unfortunately the technology
to have mile-wide WiFi just doesn't exist yet.
Maybe one of you guys listening can invent that.
Cell service, on the other hand, has
to play an entirely different game.
It has to use an entirely different package
exchanging protocol, and something
that specifically works over long
distances, hence the cell towers.
Who owns these cell towers?
Well, usually it's the phone companies, who in
this instance act as your Internet Service Provider.
Verizon, for instance, offers cell service and home internet service,
they actually own the infrastructure for both,
and both systems use the same connections.
The one other link in this chain we're missing is effectively
what you can think of as the modem for mobile phones.
The radio tower, remember, just acts
as the router, getting you the signal
and organizing your requests from the requests of other people.
Now, the modem in this situation it's
actually what's called the gateway server.
Much like the modem in your home,
which converts that coaxial data (remember?)
into some form of data your computer can understand,
the gateway server converts data into
a language your phone can understand,
and that language is called WAP or Wireless Application Protocol.
Do you need to know the details? No, not really.
Just know that WAP is a protocol optimized
for phones and for transfer over radio waves.
When you run into issues with data
coming through in the wrong way,
chances are there might be an issue with your gateway server.
If you also tried to unlock an iPhone,
and you have a CDMA service,
and you're trying to use that other one,
and it doesn't work, well, that's because
CDMA is an example of a web access protocol,
it's different than the other one.
Some phones can actually only understand CDMA,
and some can understand the other one,
and some can actually understand both.
So, all right. So that is the basics of how mobile internet works.
Same structure, just different pieces.
What else do you want to know?
Well, since phones are essentially computers that access
the internet in a very similar way, do they have IP addresses?
"Interesting question, Evan," I ask myself.
Yes, they actually do.
You can connect to someone's phone directly through their IP address,
assuming they're connected to the internet.
Go have fun with that.
All right, do we know how the mobile internet works?
I think so. Check it off the list.
See you in the next lecture!